Children Who Chase Lost Voices (星を追う子ども, Hoshi wo Ou Kodomo, lit. 
"Children Who Chase Stars"), also known as Journey to Agartha, is a 2011 
Japanese anime fantasy film written and directed by Makoto Shinkai and 
produced by CoMix Wave Films. Following his previous work 5 Centimeters 
per Second, this film is described as a "lively" animated film with 
adventure, action, and romance centered on a cheerful and spirited girl on 
a journey to say "farewell". The film was released in Japan on May 7, 
2011. It was released on DVD and Blu-ray in Japan on November 25, 2011.The 
film was previously licensed by Sentai Filmworks in North America and 
released on DVD and Blu-ray in November 2012. On May 9, 2019 it was 
announced that Sentai had lost the North American license, causing the 
releases to go out of print.[6] On March 10, 2022, GKIDS announced that 
they have licensed Children Who Chase Lost Voices, along with three other 
works by Makoto Shinkai, and will re-release the film on home video in 
2023.

Asuna Watase is a 6th grader who has been forced to grow up quickly ever 
since her father had died, while her mother, a nurse, works long shifts at 
a hospital. Asuna spends her solitary days listening to the mysterious 
music emanating from the cat's-whisker receiver her father gave to her as 
a memento, accompanied by pet cat Mimi, who bears strange red markings on 
her fur.

One day, while walking to her clubhouse across a bridge, she is attacked 
by a fearsome creature and saved by a mysterious teenage boy who calls 
himself Shun. Asuna treats Shun's wound from fighting the creature and 
later they both listen to Asuna's radio. Shun tells Asuna he is from 
another country called Agartha and that he came to this place to find 
something. He then gives Asuna a blessing in the form of a kiss to the 
forehead. Asuna leaves hurriedly and tells Shun she'll be back tomorrow. 
Shun, now alone, looks up at the stars and falls from the ledge to his 
death.

The next morning, Asuna hears from her mother that a boy was found dead in 
the river, but refuses to believe it's Shun. In school, Mr. Morisaki, a 
substitute teacher, is giving a lecture on a book which grabs Asuna's 
attention when he mentions Agartha, the land of the dead. After school, 
she visits Morisaki and asks him about Agartha. Morisaki explains that 
long ago when humankind was young, it needed the guidance of 
Quetzalcoatls, keepers of the dead, until humans matured and no longer 
needed them. They went underground along with a few humans who joined 
them.

Afterwards, Asuna goes to her hideout to find another mysterious boy who 
looks like Shun standing on the ledge. Just then, a group of armed men 
called the Arch Angels appear, and attack both of them. The mysterious boy 
hides in the underground entrance with Asuna, and the two proceed further 
into the cave when the cave's entrance is bombed. The two meet a 
Quetzalcoatl who has apparently lost its physical senses and attacks the 
boy. He refuses to kill the gatekeeper, giving Asuna his clavis, a 
crystal, and fights back. The Arch Angels interfere, killing the 
gatekeeper. The Arch Angel commander captures Asuna and uses the clavis to 
open a gateway to Agartha. The commander and Asuna enter the gateway 
followed by the boy. Once inside the commander reveals himself to be 
Morisaki and the boy also reveals himself to be Shin, Shun's younger 
brother. Morisaki tells Shin that all he wants is to bring back his late 
wife from the dead. Shin leaves Asuna and Morisaki.

Morisaki tells Asuna that she can go back but she decides to accompany 
him. They both go into the realm via an underwater entrance. Once inside, 
they journey to the Gate of Life and Death which can bring the souls of 
people back from the dead, along with Mimi (who had sneaked in inside 
Asuna's backpack).


