Suzume Iwato is a 17-year-old high school girl who lives with her aunt in Kyushu. One night, she dreams of searching for her mother as a child in a ruined neighborhood. The next morning, while headed for school, Suzume encounters a young man searching for abandoned areas with doors. She tells him about an old onsen resort nearby, then follows the man herself to the resort. Suzume finds a door standing alone on its frame, which shows a starlit field through the doorway which she cannot enter. She trips over a cat statue which becomes a real cat and flees. Frightened, she heads back to school. During lunchtime, Suzume notices a blaze-like column arising from the site of the onsen that nobody else can see. Returning there, she finds the man from before, trying to close the door. Seeing him struggle and get injured, Suzume rushes to help. The red column disappears, but not before crashing invisibly into the town and causing earthquake-like damage.

Suzume takes the man, Sōta Munakata, to her home to bandage his wound. He explains that he travels across Japan, finding and locking doors in abandoned places to prevent a giant supernatural "worm" from causing earthquakes. The cat from the resort appears and fuses Sōta with the child's chair he was sitting on. Sōta, now an animated chair, chases the cat to a ferry headed for Ehime with Suzume following. He describes the cat as a keystone, and that the worm was released after its removal from near the abandoned door.

At Ehime, the pair use clues on social media from locals who have photographed the cat and named it "Daijin" to follow it across Shikoku. With the help of local resident Chika, they find the worm and close its door of entry at an abandoned school. Following Daijin's trail to Kobe thanks to Rumi, a local bar owner, the duo encounter the worm reemerging at an abandoned amusement park. Sōta demands that Daijin turn back into a keystone, but he refuses, wanting to "play" with Suzume. She and Sōta lock the worm's portal. Sōta explains the portal leads to the afterlife where souls go after death. As they spend the night at Rumi's bar, it is revealed that Sōta is losing his sense of self in his chair form.

After tracking Daijin to Tokyo, Sōta has Suzume take him to his apartment. He explains the myth of the worm Namazu, and how it is pacified by the placement of two keystones at eastern and western Japan. The western keystone has become the cat Daijin, while records of the eastern keystone's location are obscure. Should the worm appear in Tokyo, it could destroy the city similar to the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake. Daijin reappears and reveals that he had passed on his function as a keystone to Sōta's chair form. After finding the reemerged worm, Sōta turns into a keystone in Suzume's hands, leaving Suzume to seal it away. She wakes up in a cave housing Tokyo's doorway. Peering into the afterlife, she sees the keystone Sōta but again cannot reach him. Suzume visits Sōta's grandfather at the hospital. He explains that Suzume's ability to see the worm and the afterlife through the doors means that she had accidentally entered the realm once before. Moreover, that doorway she used is the only place where she could reenter the afterlife and save Sōta.

Reuniting with her Aunt Tamaki, who followed her from Kyushu, Suzume travels to her childhood hometown in Tōhoku, which was destroyed in the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami. At a rest stop along the way, Suzume discovers that Tamaki is possessed by Sadaijin, the eastern keystone. Tamaki takes Suzume to the ruins of her old house where she once lived with her mother/Tamaki's sister, a nurse who was killed in the tsunami. Suzume finds her old door and enters with Sadaijin. She emerges in the afterlife which appears as her town following the earthquake-tsunami. While Sadaijin distracts the worm, Suzume awakens Sōta, returning him to human form. Admitting defeat, Daijin returns to being a keystone. With Daijin and Sadaijin, Suzume and Sōta reseal the worm, preventing it from leaving the afterlife.

Sōta then notices a child in the afterlife: Suzume from 12 years ago. Suzume remembers how she entered the afterlife as a child following her mother's death. She takes her childhood chair from the afterlife version of her home and gives it to her younger self, telling her about her future. Young Suzume exits the afterlife with the chair, leading to her being found by Tamaki 12 years prior. Suzume and Sōta leave the afterlife themselves, with Sōta returning to Tokyo while Suzume and Tamaki return to Kyushu, revisiting the friends she made along the way.

Sometime later, back in Miyazaki, Suzume is on her way to school when she once again runs into Sōta, walking up the same road where they first met.