In 2013, Mitsuha Miyamizu is a high school girl living in the rural town 
of Itomori, Japan. Bored of the town, she wishes to be a Tokyo boy in her 
next life. One day, she inexplicably begins to switch bodies 
intermittently with Taki Tachibana, a high school boy in Tokyo. Thus, when 
they wake up as each other on some mornings, they must live through the 
other's respective activities and social interactions for the day. They 
learn they can communicate with each other by leaving messages on paper, 
phones, and sometimes on each other's skin. Mitsuha (in Taki's body) sets 
Taki up on a date with coworker Miki Okudera, while Taki (in Mitsuha's 
body) causes Mitsuha to become popular at school. One day, Taki (in 
Mitsuha's body) accompanies Mitsuha's grandmother Hitoha and younger 
sister Yotsuha to leave the ritual alcohol kuchikamizake, made by the 
sisters, as an offering at the Shinto shrine located on a mountaintop 
outside the town. It is believed to represent the body of the village 
guardian god ruling over human connections and time. Taki reads a note 
from Mitsuha about the comet Tiamat, expected to pass nearest to Earth on 
the day of the autumn festival. The next day, Taki wakes up in his body 
and goes on a date with Miki, who tells him she enjoyed the date but also 
that she can tell he is preoccupied with thoughts of someone else. Taki 
attempts to call Mitsuha on the phone, but cannot reach her as the 
body-switching ends.

Taki, Miki, and their friend Tsukasa travel to Gifu by train on a trip to 
Hida in search of Mitsuha. However, Taki does not know the name of 
Itomori, relying on his sketches of the surrounding landscape from memory. 
A restaurant owner in Takayama is from Itomori and recognizes the town in 
the sketch. He takes Taki and his friends to the ruins of Itomori, which 
has been destroyed and where 500 residents were killed when Tiamat 
unexpectedly fragmented as it passed by Earth three years earlier. Taki 
sees Mitsuha's messages disappearing from his phone, and his memories of 
her begin to gradually fade, realizing the two were also separated by 
time, as he is in 2016. Taki finds Mitsuha's name in the record of 
fatalities. While Miki and Tsukasa return to Tokyo, Taki journeys to the 
shrine, hoping to reconnect with Mitsuha and warn her about Tiamat. There, 
Taki drinks Mitsuha's kuchikamizake and then lapses into a vision, where 
he glimpses Mitsuha's past. He also recalls that he encountered Mitsuha on 
a train when she came to Tokyo the day before the event to find him, 
though Taki did not recognize her as the body-switching was yet to occur 
in his timeframe. Before leaving the train in embarrassment, Mitsuha had 
handed him her hair ribbon, which he has since worn on his wrist as a 
good-luck charm.

Taki wakes up in Mitsuha's body at her house on the morning of the 
festival. Hitoha deduces what has happened and tells him the 
body-switching ability has been passed down in her family as caretakers of 
the shrine. Taki convinces Tessie and Sayaka, two of Mitsuha's friends, to 
get the townspeople to evacuate Itomori, by disabling the electrical 
substation and broadcasting a false emergency alert. Taki heads to the 
shrine, realizing that Mitsuha must be in his body there, while Mitsuha 
wakes up in Taki's body. At sunset, the two sense each other's presence on 
the mountaintop but are separated due to contrasting timeframes and cannot 
see each other. When twilight falls,[note 1] they return to their own 
bodies and see each other in person. After Taki returns Mitsuha's ribbon, 
they attempt to write their names on each other's palms so that they will 
remember each other. However, before Mitsuha can write hers, twilight 
passes, and they revert to their respective timeframes. When the 
evacuation plan fails, Mitsuha has to convince her father, Toshiki, the 
mayor of Itomori, to evacuate everyone. Before doing so, Mitsuha notices 
her memories of Taki are fading away and discovers he wrote "I love you" 
on her hand instead of his own name. After Tiamat crashes, Taki returns to 
his own timeframe and remembers nothing.

Five years later, Taki, having graduated from university, is searching for 
a job. He senses he has lost something vital that he cannot identify, and 
feels inexplicable interest in the events surrounding Tiamat, now eight 
years in the past: Itomori was destroyed, but all of its people survived 
as they had evacuated just in time. Mitsuha has since moved to Tokyo. 
Sometime later, Taki and Mitsuha glimpse each other when their respective 
trains pass each other and are instantly drawn to seek one another, 
disembarking and racing to find the other, finally meeting at the stairs 
of Suga Shrine. Taki calls out to Mitsuha, saying that he feels he knows 
her, and she responds likewise. Having finally found what each had long 
searched for, they shed tears of happiness and simultaneously ask each 
other for their name.


